GCP BigLake support in Cloud (#1731)
redpanda-data/documentation: versioned_docs/version-23.2/deploy/deployment-option/self-hosted/kubernetes/kubernetes-production-deployment.mdx

    <link rel="canonical" href="https://docs.redpanda.com/docs/deploy/deployment-option/self-hosted/kubernetes/kubernetes-production-deployment/" />
</head>

Kubernetes is a container orchestration tool that helps you to manage Redpanda deployments using declarative configuration files called _manifests_.
Kubernetes provides a standardized way of achieving the following:

- High availability
- Disaster recovery
- Scalability

## Redpanda Helm chart vs Redpanda Operator

To deploy Redpanda in Kubernetes, you can choose to use Helm for its simplicity, or combine it with the Redpanda Operator to take advantage of additional benefits such as fleet management and constant reconciliation.

> |        | Helm | Helm + Redpanda Operator (recommended) |

Reviewer: @joejulian please review to see if any benefits  of Helm+OPerator approach are missing

Reviewer 2: There is no functional advantage to using one over the other. The only thing you get using the operator is the ability to do gitops easier.

Reviewer 3: Called this advantage out in the intro paragraph before the table.

| **Constant reconciliation** | :x: | :heavy_check_mark: |

### Helm and Redpanda Operator

The recommended option for deploying Redpanda in Kubernetes is a combination of Helm and Redpanda Operator.

Helm is a package manager for Kubernetes, which simplifies the process of defining, installing, and upgrading Kubernetes applications. Helm uses charts, a collection of files that describe a related set of Kubernetes resources, to deploy applications in a Kubernetes cluster.

The Redpanda Helm chart generates and applies all the manifest files you need for deploying Redpanda in Kubernetes. For example, the StatefulSet to manage the Redpanda brokers, a Headless ClusterIP Service for internal communicaton, and a NodePort Service for external communication.

The Redpanda Operator extends Kubernetes by providing custom resource definitions (CRDs) to represent Redpanda clusters as native Kubernetes resources. The Redpanda custom resource allows you to define a declarative configuration describing what a Redpanda cluster should look like. The Redpanda Operator monitors Kubernetes for Redpanda custom resources, and it creates or updates the Helm chart to match the configuration.

> Deploying Redpanda with Helm and Redpanda Operator provides the following benefits:

Reviewer: @JakeSCahill somewhere in here we need to tout the NEW benefit of being able to run in multi-tenant K8s clusters (impossible with the old operator).  This is a major unblock for customers.  Not sure if this is the right place but maybe

cc @joejulian

Reviewer 2: Sure, can go here. Can be done with either helm or the operator, btw.

Reviewer 3: Added this as a feature of both options.

> - **Constant reconciliation**: Redpanda Operator offers constant reconciliation of configuration drift. If the live state of your cluster drifts from the desired state defined in the Helm chart, Redpanda Operator will reconcile the differences, ensuring the stability and reliability of your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Constant reconciliation**: Redpanda Operator offers constant reconciliation of configuration drift. If the live state of your cluster drifts from the desired state defined in the Redpanda custom resource, Redpanda Operator will reconcile the differences, ensuring the stability and reliability of your application.
```

> - **Constant reconciliation**: Redpanda Operator offers constant reconciliation of configuration drift. If the live state of your cluster drifts from the desired state defined in the Redpanda custom resource, Redpanda Operator will reconcile the differences, ensuring the stability and reliability of your application.

Reviewer 3: Should we call this out as a caution? Users may expect the Operator to reconcile the live state to the declared state as this is what other Operators do. cc @mattschumpert

> - **Constant reconciliation**: Redpanda Operator offers constant reconciliation of configuration drift. If the live state of your cluster drifts from the desired state defined in the Redpanda custom resource, Redpanda Operator will reconcile the differences, ensuring the stability and reliability of your application.

Reviewer: @joejulian should we talk about the self-healing side of reconciliation then (Operator will always replace lost broker pods)?  What's the punchline of how the new Operator DOES try to maintain a healthy system?

> - **Fleet management**: Redpanda Operator allows you to manage a fleet of Redpanda clusters in the same namespace, making it suitable for large scale deployments.

Reviewer 3: Added this to the comparison table.

- **Ease of use**: Deploying Redpanda with Helm requires minimal Kubernetes and Helm commands.

- **Efficiency**: Helm charts encapsulate all necessary configurations, significantly speeding up the deployment process.

- **Version management** : Helm allows you to track versions of your applications, making updates and rollbacks easier to handle.

### Helm

> The second option for deploying Redpanda in Kubernetes is using only Helm without the Redpanda Operator.

Reviewer: @JakeSCahill  this section seems a little thin.  What CAN I do if I only use the helm chart?

- **Health monitoring and repairs**: The health of the master nodes is continuously monitored, and repairs are made as necessary. This provides an additional level of confidence in the reliability of the platform.

However, you are still responsible for deploying and maintaining your Redpanda instances on the worker nodes.

### Bare-metal Kubernetes environments

Bare-metal Kubernetes environments refer to any deployments where you are responsible for both the control plane and the master nodes. Running Redpanda on bare-metal environments offers several advantages:

- **Complete control**: With bare-metal Kubernetes, you have full control over every aspect of the deployment. Bare-metal deployments may be beneficial when your needs aren't addressed by managed Kubernetes services.
- **Custom configuration**: Bare-metal allows for granular control over the Kubernetes configuration, meaning you can fine-tune the environment.
- **Cost efficiency**: Owning and operating your own hardware may prove to be more cost-effective.

## Get started

> Whether you're deploying locally or on Azure, Google Cloud, Amazon Web Services, choose one of the following guides to get you started:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Whether you're deploying locally or on Azure, Google Cloud, or Amazon Web Services, choose one of the following guides to get you started:
```
